Doc/wallet sdk errors (#891)
midnightntwrk/midnight-docs: sdks/error-reference/wallet-sdk.mdx

---
title: Wallet SDK error reference
description: Error reference for the Wallet SDK.
sidebar_position: 20
sidebar_label: Wallet SDK error reference
tags: [error reference]
toc_max_heading_level: 2
---

# Wallet SDK error reference

All errors in the Midnight wallet SDK are Effect `Data.TaggedError` instances unless noted otherwise. 

To catch errors, use `Effect.catchTag` with the `_tag` field shown for each error. For union types, use `Effect.catchTags`.

This reference highlights the error classes with details on how to catch and fix them.

## Node client (`@midnight-ntwrk/wallet-sdk-node-client`)

> These 7 errors form the `NodeClientError` union type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These seven errors form the `NodeClientError` union type.
```

```typescript
Effect.catchTag('TransactionUsurpedError', (e) => ...)
```

### `TransactionDroppedError`

An error indicating that the node dropped a transaction, most likely because the mempool is full.

| Field | Value |
|-------|-------|
| `_tag` | `'TransactionDroppedError'` |

**Fix**: Wait for the mempool to drain and resubmit. Consider increasing the transaction fee if the network supports fee prioritization.

```typescript
Effect.catchTag('TransactionDroppedError', (e) => ...)
```

### `TransactionInvalidError`

An error indicating that the node rejected a transaction as invalid.

| Field | Value |
|-------|-------|
| `_tag` | `'TransactionInvalidError'` |

**Fix**: A malformed transaction or a validation-rule violation caused this error. Review the transaction construction logic. Do not resubmit without changes.

```typescript
Effect.catchTag('TransactionInvalidError', (e) => ...)
```

## Shielded wallet (`@midnight-ntwrk/wallet-sdk-shielded`)

The shielded wallet exposes 8 error types:

### `OtherWalletError`

Catch-all for wallet errors that do not fit a more specific category.

| Field | Value |
|-------|-------|
| `_tag` | `'Wallet.Other'` |

> **Fix**: Inspect the error details. If this surfaces in production, consider opening an issue with a reproduction case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Fix**: Inspect the error details. If this surfaces in production, then consider opening an issue with a reproduction case.
```

Effect.catchTag('Wallet.Sync', (e) => ...)
```

### `SubmissionWalletError`

A wrapper around submission errors that occur at the wallet layer (distinct from the node-client `SubmissionError`).

| Field | Value |
|-------|-------|
| `_tag` | `'Wallet.SubmissionWalletError'` |

**Fix**: Unwrap and inspect the underlying cause. Usually delegates to the node-client submission path.

```typescript
Effect.catchTag('Wallet.SubmissionWalletError', (e) => ...)
```

### `InsufficientFundsError`

An error indicating that the wallet does not hold enough tokens of the specified type to complete the operation.

| Field | Value |
|-------|-------|
| `_tag` | `'Wallet.InsufficientFunds'` |
| Fields | `tokenType: string`, `amount: bigint` |

**Fix**: Check the wallet balance for `tokenType` before constructing the transaction. Request a top-up or reduce the transfer amount.

```typescript
Effect.catchTag('Wallet.InsufficientFunds', (e) => {
  console.log(`Need more ${e.tokenType}, shortfall: ${e.amount}`)
})
```

### `AddressError`

An error indicating that the provided address is invalid.

| Field | Value |
|-------|-------|
| `_tag` | `'Wallet.Address'` |
| Fields | `originalAddress: string` |

> **Fix**: Validate the address format before use. See `packages/address-format` for format rules. The `originalAddress` field contains the rejected input.

Reviewer: For..., see LINK.

| Field | Value |
|-------|-------|
| `_tag` | `'Wallet.InvalidCoinHashes'` |
| Fields | `missingNonces: unknown[]` |

**Fix**: Ensure coins are fully synced before spending. The `missingNonces` field identifies the affected coins.

```typescript
Effect.catchTag('Wallet.InvalidCoinHashes', (e) => ...)
```

### `TransactingError`

Error during transaction construction or fee balancing.

| Field | Value |
|-------|-------|
| `_tag` | `'Wallet.Transacting'` |

**Fix**: Check that inputs are valid and that the fee token balance is sufficient. Review transaction parameters.

```typescript
Effect.catchTag('Wallet.Transacting', (e) => ...)
```

### `TransactionHistoryError`

Error reading or writing the transaction history store.

| Field | Value |
|-------|-------|
| `_tag` | `'Wallet.TransactionHistory'` |

**Fix**: Check local storage availability and permissions. A corrupt store history might be causing the error. Clearing and resyncing is a recovery option.

```typescript
Effect.catchTag('Wallet.TransactionHistory', (e) => ...)
```

## Unshielded wallet (`@midnight-ntwrk/wallet-sdk-unshielded-wallet`)

> The unshielded wallet exposes 11 error types: all 8 from the shielded wallet (same `_tag` values) plus 5 additional types below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The unshielded wallet exposes 11 error types: all eight from the shielded wallet (same `_tag` values) plus five additional types below.
```

### `SignError`

Failed to sign a transaction.

| Field | Value |
|-------|-------|
| `_tag` | `'Wallet.Sign'` |

**Fix**: Ensure the signing key is available and not locked. Check hardware wallet connectivity if applicable.

```typescript
Effect.catchTag('Wallet.Sign', (e) => ...)
```

### `ApplyTransactionError`

Failed to apply a transaction to the local UTXO set.

| Field | Value |
|-------|-------|
| `_tag` | `'Wallet.ApplyTransaction'` |

**Fix**: Usually follows a submission error. Verify that the node accepted the transaction before attempting to apply it locally.

```typescript
Effect.catchTag('Wallet.ApplyTransaction', (e) => ...)
```

### `RollbackUtxoError`

Failed to roll back a UTXO during a chain reorganisation.

| Field | Value |
|-------|-------|
| `_tag` | `'Wallet.RollbackUtxo'` |

> **Fix**: If rollback fails repeatedly, then the local UTXO state might be inconsistent. In this case, you may need a full resync.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Fix**: If rollback fails repeatedly, then the local UTXO state might be inconsistent. If that happens, then you might need a full resync.
```

```typescript
Effect.catchTag('Wallet.RollbackUtxo', (e) => ...)
```

### `SpendUtxoError`

Failed to mark a UTXO as spent.

| Field | Value |
|-------|-------|
| `_tag` | `'Wallet.SpendUtxo'` |

**Fix**: The UTXO may already be spent or not present in the local set. To reconcile state, resync the wallet.

```typescript
Effect.catchTag('Wallet.SpendUtxo', (e) => ...)
```

### `UtxoNotFoundError`

A referenced UTXO could not be found in the local set.

| Field | Value |
|-------|-------|
| `_tag` | `'UtxoNotFoundError'` |

> **Fix**: Ensure the wallet is fully synced. The UTXO may have already been spent or the sync may be behind the chain tip.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Fix**: Ensure the wallet is fully synced. The UTXO might have already been spent or the sync might be behind the chain tip.
```

```typescript
Effect.catchTag('UtxoNotFoundError', (e) => ...)
```

## DUST wallet (`@midnight-ntwrk/wallet-sdk-dust-wallet`)

> The DUST wallet exposes 4 error types, all shared with the shielded wallet:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The DUST wallet exposes four error types, all shared with the shielded wallet:
```

| Error | `_tag` |
|-------|--------|
| `OtherWalletError` | `'Wallet.Other'` |
| `SyncWalletError` | `'Wallet.Sync'` |
| `TransactingError` | `'Wallet.Transacting'` |
| `InsufficientFundsError` | `'Wallet.InsufficientFunds'` |

> See the [Shielded wallet](#shielded-wallet-midnight-ntwrkwallet-sdk-shielded) section for field details and fixes.

Reviewer: For..., see LINK.

## Capabilities (`@midnight-ntwrk/wallet-sdk-capabilities`)

The capabilities package exposes 3 error types.

### `ProvingError`

Wraps errors from the proving provider.

| Field | Value |
|-------|-------|
| `_tag` | `'Wallet.Proving'` |

**Fix**: Check proof server connectivity and that you are loading the correct circuit keys. Inspect the wrapped cause for the underlying provider error.

```typescript
Effect.catchTag('Wallet.Proving', (e) => ...)
```

### `SubmissionError` (Capabilities)

Submission error raised at the capabilities/service layer.

| Field | Value |
|-------|-------|
| `_tag` | `'SubmissionError'` |

**Fix**: Same as node-client `SubmissionError`. Check node connectivity and transaction validity.

```typescript
Effect.catchTag('SubmissionError', (e) => ...)
```

### `InsufficientFundsError` (Capabilities — native `Error`)

> This is a plain JavaScript `Error`, **not** a `Data.TaggedError`. It is thrown (not yielded as an Effect failure) during coin selection.

Reviewer: Do not use bold to emphasize. Use italics.

**Known messages**: `"Insufficient Funds: could not balance <tokenType>"` 

Where `<tokenType>` is the token identifier.

**Fix**: Catch with standard `try/catch` or `Effect.tryPromise`. Ensure the wallet has enough of the specified token type before invoking coin selection.

## Utilities (`@midnight-ntwrk/wallet-sdk-utilities`)

> The utilities package exposes 5 error types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The utilities package exposes five error types.
```

| Field | Value |
|-------|-------|
| `_tag` | `'FailedToDeriveWebSocketUrlError'` |

**Fix**: Check that the input URL is well-formed and that the derivation logic covers the provided scheme/host combination.

```typescript
Effect.catchTag('FailedToDeriveWebSocketUrlError', (e) => ...)
```

### `ClientError`

A client-side networking error, corresponding to HTTP 400–499 status codes.

| Field | Value |
|-------|-------|
| `_tag` | `'ClientError'` |

**Fix**: These indicate a problem with the request, such as bad input, authentication failure, or not found. Do not retry without changing the request. Inspect the error for the specific status code.

```typescript
Effect.catchTag('ClientError', (e) => ...)
```

### `ServerError`

A server-side error, corresponding to HTTP 500+ status codes.

| Field | Value |
|-------|-------|
| `_tag` | `'ServerError'` |

**Fix**: For persistent 500 errors, check server logs. The SDK automatically retries on transient 502–504 errors (gateway/service unavailable errors).

```typescript
Effect.catchTag('ServerError', (e) => ...)
```

## Runtime (`@midnight-ntwrk/wallet-sdk-runtime`)

> The runtime package exposes 1 error type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The runtime package exposes one error type.
```

### `WalletRuntimeError`

A configuration error in the wallet runtime.

| Field | Value |
|-------|-------|
| `_tag` | `'WalletRuntimeError'` |

**Known messages**:
- `"No variant to init"`: No wallet variant was provided during initialisation
- `"Empty variants list"`: The variants list supplied to the runtime is empty

**Fix**: Ensure that you configure at least one wallet variant before you initialise the runtime.

```typescript
Effect.catchTag('WalletRuntimeError', (e) => ...)
```

## Address format (`@midnight-ntwrk/wallet-sdk-address-format`)

> The address format package exposes 5 error types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The address format package exposes five error types.
```
